Hey, Brian.
Hey. Hello, hello.
Happy to be here with everyone on YouTube.
Thanks for watching the video, either live or after,
if you come back and watch this later.
And while you're here, be sure to click the subscribe button on YouTube.
We super appreciate that.
And maybe crush that bell so you get notified, as they say,
amongst all the cool kids.
Speaking of cool kids, let's do this, Brian.
Okay.
Hello and welcome to Python Bytes, where we deliver Python news and headlines directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 458, recorded November 17th, 2025. I'm Michael Kennedy.
And I'm Brian Okken.
And this episode is brought to you by us. All the things that we're doing.
We have many fun and useful things to offer you.
pytest books, pytest courses, Python training courses, the agentic AI programming course
about how you take GenTech AI
and turn it from like weird wizardry smushiness
into engineering.
It's going incredibly well.
So check that course out.
Follow us on the socials.
Python by set up slash live
if you want to see this live
or streaming live or see the old shows.
And be sure to sign up to our newsletter.
We have tons of people
really getting a lot of value of that.
Brian's putting that out.
And yeah, it's really nice.
It's not just the links of the show notes, but it's extra deep information,
background information, that kind of stuff.
And the joke.
Always the joke, Brian.
Always the joke.
And we put a link to the joke if we can find a link to the joke in the newsletter as well.
Exactly.
Sometimes the joke has a link, and sometimes it's just like a dad programming joke,
and it just has words.
What do you want to talk about first?
I actually want to talk about Django.
Oh, really?
Okay.
and actually kind of lightweight i want to talk about the django website um i i guess i heard
about this but there was a discussion about maybe maybe redesigning the django website it's been like
the same for a while um and it works um it's good but um there is i i noticed uh adam hill put out a
mock-up for what the Django website might look like.
So here's his new one.
And I'm kind of liking it.
I like the animated thing at the top.
It's the task framework.
Oh, my gosh.
Did Django just jump like 20 years into the future?
Yeah.
From where it was to the current day.
It looks pretty good.
It's got like search documentation at the top that's really easy to find.
I mean, I guess there was, yeah, there's no, I don't know where you have to, the search documentation isn't at the top here.
I like the search there.
I'm liking it.
I like the, I like the, just the life of it feels, feels good.
I think that maybe we should go with it.
But, you know, it's just my vote.
But you can, you can join the discussion too if you'd like to help out.
And there is some assistance that Adam Hill is okay with.
So there's, and it's not just him.
I'm putting a link to a discussion where he announced what his little, his demo.
He said, I'd love help with in the form of PRs to the repo, explicitly not looking for drive-by critical feedback without PRs.
That's fine.
I guess here's my drive-by feedback.
I like it.
I know that's not really feedback, but I do like it.
But you can read, it looks like he kind of picked this up off of other,
there was other work.
Just a reminder that this doc informed my approach.
So there's another document about things.
I didn't look at it, actually.
But the discussion's been going on for a while.
If I scroll to the top, there's been a discussion on,
how do you do this?
Up to September 21st.
Oh, it looks like he started it.
that maybe we ought to redesign the website.
It's not too long then, September 21st to now.
But I think that it'd be cool to give.
Why not?
Let's go for it.
You know, I think, look, Django's a web framework.
It should not look like it's 15 years old
and outdated and rusty.
I mean, it's a project that's getting tons of love and attention.
And I think it's a really good idea to make it feel like it belongs at the
cutting edge of web development these days.
And, you know, just that website is aged fine,
but it's like a long time, right?
Yeah, it is a long time.
But also, even if the, it should be a,
to make it feel alive also, the website could be, it could change also.
Not that, I mean, even if this one doesn't, I mean,
maybe this is great and this will be great for the new one.
It'll be great for a long time,
but I think that we should be tweaking it on a regular basis just to,
to make sure people understand that it's still, still moving.
So, yeah, absolutely. And hat tip to Adam Hill.
That is a very nice looking website.
Yeah. I think it's neat. Plus I love the, I gotta say,
I love the documentation at the top, the search docs, because that's,
I often just go there because I'm used to going to a project homepage to search
the docs. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very cool. All right. What you got? I want to dive into some
concurrent database stuff. So I want to talk about AIO SQLite pool. So there's three concepts here,
asyncio, SQLite, and then a connection pool type of thing. So normally you just work with
SQLite and it just says, hey, let's go open up all the infrastructure to talk to the SQLite
database and do your work. And then it closes it. Then it opens it. Then it closes it. Then it opens
it. And that's not necessarily the fastest way to do that. Maybe you could just leave it open.
But you don't want to leak these connections or have a whole insane ton of them open. So instead,
the idea is to use this connection pool. So you say, instead of give me a connection, you say,
give me a connection from the pool, right? And it'll keep a certain number of them open and hand
them over to you when it needs or wait. If there's already 10 connections running queries, you probably
can just better off to wait and try to hit it with another. So that's what this is. And it's not
a replacement. Maybe people have heard of AIO SQLite. AIO SQLite is a way to talk async and await,
but to SQLite. And all this is a little bit funky and interesting because SQLite is a file
that runs in process. It's stored as a file and it's a thing that runs in your Python process.
So you're not going out to the network and waiting and that kind of thing. But this AIO,
SQLite gives you an async programming model. But the way it works is you create a connection,
do a query, and then when you do async with, when that with block, that context manager closes,
the connection's gone, right?
So over and over, it's kind of up and down, right?
And so the idea is this AIO SQLite pool
wraps this SQLite library for basically three core problems.
One, it tries to eliminate connection overhead
by avoiding repeatedly opening and closing syscalls,
mem allocation, teardowns, all that kind of stuff, right?
Which I already described.
It also has the advantage of potentially faster queries
via hot cache. So long-lived connections keep SQLite's in-memory page cache hot, right? Like,
so once a database has seen a query, it has to look at the query and say, okay, we're going to
come up with a query plan. Do we use this index? Are there any indexes? How are we going to sort it?
Is it a table scan? There's all these things, right? And that has to be determined for a query.
So it could be kept around and reused better, potentially, and maximize the connection throughput.
So there's a bunch of stuff in here and some examples and so on.
Again, similar programming model with connection with async width,
but you get a connection from the pool.
Somewhere down here, though, there are some stats, I do believe.
Yes, the very, very bottom.
Let's see.
Here.
It says just doing 100,000 complex read applications across 20 workers
with a reasonable-ish database setup,
5 million comments, 10 million likes, 100,000 posts.
And so like real data, not just like,
there's three items, query them.
Which one is the, you know, which one's bigger than one?
Anyway, with all that, it says,
what's your throughput without the pool?
You get 3,000 operations a second.
With it, you get 6,000.
Basically for all the metrics you care about,
it's like a 2x improvement almost.
Not quite, but almost.
So like throughput's almost double.
The latency is almost half, more than half, better than that.
So on, right?
So instead of 60 milliseconds, it's 20 milliseconds response time,
that kind of thing.
So why not, you know, if this is easy to use?
So you're going to, like, maybe I'm dense,
but I can use this and I can have multiple async
or multiple parts of my process
accessing the same file at the same time?
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, SQLite supports concurrent access.
And especially if you're reading,
there's no problem reading the file in parallel.
Yeah.
Right?
So, yeah.
Anyway, if you're doing SQLite stuff
and you're doing async stuff, check this out.
There may also be a SQLite pool that is not async.
I have no idea.
I haven't looked at that.
But once you get to the point where you're like,
I'm worried about concurrent speed access to my database,
you know what?
You might just, you're probably already in async land anyway.
So here you are.
Yeah.
So the answer is, yes, you're dense.
And I'm going to answer you anyway.
But no, thanks.
Yeah, yeah.
All right, over to you.
Okay.
I am going to, I'd like to talk about dependencies a little bit.
Last week, I think it was last week,
we talked about,  uv tree or, you know, pip dep tree and uv pip tree. and those
are great things. a similar, it's the sound similar, but it's not,  I'm going to talk about
dep tree D E P T R Y. And I'm pretty sure this was recommended by somebody, but I can't,
I couldn't find the reference. So I'm sorry for losing your name, but thanks. thanks to
everybody for suggesting topics. So Deptree is D-E-P-T-R-Y. And what it does is it's a command
line tool to check for issues with dependencies in a Python project, such as unused or missing
dependencies. So the idea is like, so I appreciate the unused part. The missing dependencies,
I'm probably going to catch and test, but hopefully, but maybe you don't have thorough
tests.
So if you're importing something and it doesn't show up in your requirements file or your
pipeproject.toml, it'll flag that.
And the reverse is true too.
So if you have a dependency listed, but maybe you refactored your code, you're not using
that dependency anymore, it'd be nice to find out that you don't need it.
So that's pretty much what it does.
but i really wanted one and so that's and it's pretty easy you install it in your project
and um and then you run it and it scans everything um and lets you know if hey you've got uh for
instance um numpy is imported but you didn't declare it as a dependency and it does have this
idea of uh development in dependencies um versus project dependencies and that's the part that
trip me up a little bit that it that's the switch it's either development dependency or uh or a
project dependency and it's it's unfortunately like super easy to get started and really easy
to get tripped up by it and i got tripped up because um because i use um i use optional
dependencies for tests often so i'll do something like uh like list test and as an option in my
project toml i'll say project optional dependency for test i've got pi test and all my pi test
plugins um and then maybe uh maybe doc for docs for um all of my like make docs or something to
build the documentation pretty standard but um what deptree does is it finds these optional
dependencies and just includes them in your normal dependencies because it might be your CLI or your
GUI, which is interesting. I guess I don't get why your GUI or your CLI would be optional, but
maybe two choices. I don't like it either, but I think I've seen it like I want to install this
and only have the CLI or I want to install this and I do also want to have the GUI and the GUI
install might be super heavyweight.
You know what I mean? It's just a way to say I want
less instead of
the union of all possible
use cases.
Actually, I... Oh, cool.
I've got a... I wonder if I can work this
in test suites because there's times
where I want some of it. Anyway,
I'm getting off on a tangent, but I think this would be
fun to play with with test suites.
Why I'm going down this rabbit
hole is because the most common thing
of...
and configuration it's way it's like buried in here but if i look for a py test uh i'm gonna
have to look for it a couple times i guess here we go so optional dependencies uh test of py test
you have to list it out as you have to add this big pip dep tree or tool dot dep tree and
then pep621 dev dependency groups this is kind of verbose guys but uh that's what you got to do
if you do that it all works fine because i i just like tried this out on a simple project and it
said you're in you've included py test but you don't import it anywhere no i don't import it
anywhere i'm using it for my test do you understand what this is for so um i'm a little thrown that
I think maybe I'll suggest
that this, that
their example of using
the dev dependency
groups are at the very least
test and docs.
And I think that that should be the default.
I don't think you should have to declare that.
You know, if
you've got a tests or docs,
it's probably
a development dependency.
Yeah.
But anyway, I had fun with it.
I tried it out.
I do like the, it's not a whole bunch of rules.
The rules are like,
projects should not contain missing dependencies,
should not contain unused dependencies,
should not use transitive dependencies.
That's interesting.
Yeah, I kind of agree.
You don't depend on,
if something's getting imported or installed
because you installed something else,
that third-party package might refactor and not include that.
So yeah, you should probably be transitive.
Anyway, I think a fun project,
and yeah, I'm going to check it out a little bit more.
Very cool.
Henry out there says,
those tests and doc dependencies
should be dependency groups nowadays.
Okay.
I appreciate that.
I don't do nuanced stuff enough to know.
So yes, thanks, Henry.
Thanks for that homework, Andrew.
Yes, exactly.
Thanks for the homework, man.
So you know what?
I could find myself on a server or just the terminal,
and I'm trying to figure out why are some of my dependencies missing?
Where are my files even?
What's going on, Brian?
And I came across this thing called Jephton Browser.
Drop the E.
So it's a little bit too Web 2.0 E, but it still has the O,
so I don't really know what that means.
Anyway, what it is, is this is a really neat tool
that is basically an interactive,
like keyboard-driven and mouse-driven experience,
like a Finder or Windows Explorer,
but for your terminal and works over SSH.
So if I SSH into a server, I can say browser in a folder
and it gives me a tree of all the folders.
I can arrow through them, I can click through them and then expand.
And when you click on them, it will show on the right the file
and on the left the tree of the area starting from where you ran it and down.
Isn't that cool?
That is pretty cool.
Yeah, and it has basically the viewing for the files.
It has context highlighting.
You can even show images and a couple other things like that.
So really neat.
And I think if you're doing anything super terminal-based,
I know you can run on your local machine, but I don't know.
Here's a little tip for people who don't know.
If you're in a folder on macOS, you can type open space dot,
and that will just bring up Finder there.
In Windows, you can say start space dot,
and it will open up Windows Explorer focused in that folder.
So if you're in the terminal and you want like a GUI-like thing,
you're pretty close.
You're pretty close to having it.
You've got to type browser anyway if you want to get this thing to start.
But if you're on an SSH connection to a server, well, there is no alternative but to just LS your way through.
And this is a really nice way to just kind of flip through and exploit what is in here.
And as you move through the files, it displays them with syntax highlighting.
I like it. I think it's super, super useful.
It's going to be part of my server maintenance toolkit, I think is what I'll say.
Yeah, it's fun.
You know, I'm also one to possibly just use open dot for that,
but also just cheat and just say code space dot and open
and have the tree directory.
I think the O is necessary in the name so that it's bro.
So bros are maybe.
Bro.
Fair.
Yeah, and if you don't, it's not on the GitHub, I don't think,
But if you click their domain, which is effectively like a read the docs type of thing,
you can actually see it in action with a little animated screen recording.
We love animated screen recording.
Yes.
So, so nice.
Cool.
All right.
What do you got?
Extras?
I just have a show and tell extra because I went to an estate sale a couple weeks ago.
and I got a fun gift
or a fun little thing that I just
picked up.
I was going to show it off.
I got this book
called Micro.
Understanding the Micro.
It's microcomputers,
how they work and what they can do.
It's sort of fun.
It's for kids and stuff.
In the back,
there's a buyer's guide.
And I flipped back and I'm like, well, does it have mine?
And yeah, sure enough, the TRS-80 Color Computer.
That was my story.
Ooh, okay.
Fun little book.
And I haven't read much of it yet, though, but it should be fun.
It even talks about basic programming and stuff like that.
Nice.
You see, Brian, I was definitely later in the computer hardware game.
My brother had a Commodore 64,
but I saved up when I was in high school,
and I got myself a 486 DX.
Not the SX, but the one with the floating point processor
and 33 megahertz.
That's where I started off.
I think that's close to what I had.
I think I must have been ahead of you a little bit
I bought a 486 IBM 46 when I was in college so I could do homework on it.
I think the first thing I bought was Turbo Pascal for it.
Nice.
I think the first thing I got was MechWarriors.
Yeah.
All right.
Awesome.
Well, there's a whole bunch of stories from that era, but let's go back to this era.
And I just want to say, since you gave the recommendation of John Papa's Peacock,
I've been playing with it.
It is so good.
It's fun, right?
It is really, really useful.
And what I didn't realize, the way it works is if you're in something like Cursor or VS Code or whatever,
and you have to create a workspace, not just open a directory.
But once you create the workspace, it embeds your styling for that project into the workspace file.
So it syncs across machines naturally by just doing get push, get pull.
And so, yeah, it's a little bit extra like that.
So that's pretty cool.
Anyway, I just want to give a shout out to the follow up to that, I suppose.
Like, yeah, that was awesome.
Still is.
Cool.
I guess I have, do you have more extras?
No, without further extras.
I have one that I kind of forgot to say.
I am still working on the Lean TDD book,
and I'm almost done with the building on test-driven development chapter.
So finally, with a book like TDD in the name,
I finally talked about TDD in it.
I haven't released that yet,
but I'm hoping to release that later today or maybe tomorrow.
Oh, very cool. Awesome. I love it.
That's great. I love the idea.
and Brutus out there says, Peacock is awesome.
I used it since last week when you talked about it, Brian.
Thanks.
Cool.
Yeah, I love it.
Yeah, I do too.
All right, let's do our joke.
So, you know, people have threats.
They can be empty threats or scary threats.
You know, like I'm going to tell the world about this thing that you did weird
or I'm going to fight you.
I'm going to punch you in the gut or whatever.
But that's not a very common thing that programmers do.
Programmers have a different version.
I will find you and I will install Linux on your computer.
Yeah, that's extreme.
Yeah, you know you've messed up when someone gets over and you're like,
Fedora, all right, who did this?
What is this?
Reminds me of the, I'm having the BIOS flavor of the slushies.
or the frozen yogurt or whatever.
Yeah, pretty good.
I will downvote your Hacker News article.
Oh, yeah, exactly.
I will definitely downvote your Hacker News article.
Or, you know, this also reminds me of
some of the jokes people used to play.
Oh, my goodness.
Especially with Windows,
if you could change the background image.
Oh, yeah.
To the blue screen of death.
Like change the background image to the blue screen of death.
Or I know when Vista came out, people were super like,
do not put this on my computer.
And the IT people were installing it.
And I know someone who took a screenshot of Vista,
put it onto someone else's computer,
and then in-tasked their Explorer or something like that.
And so they didn't have any.
They had no thing overlaying it.
So it just like, no, they didn't.
And they're like, click on it.
Like, I told you it wouldn't work.
Nothing even clicks here.
Yeah.
I will find you and do stuff.
Your computer's pretty fun.
But this one is I will find you and install Linux in your computer.
That's funny.
Yeah.
Be careful whose child you abduct.
Exactly.
Well, I'll tell you what.
I'm not actually going to go install Linux on anyone's computers,
other than particularly mine.
So no threats here.
Yeah.
Although Henry does point out that these days,
Maybe the opposite is more threatening.
I'll find you and I'll store Windows 11 on your computer.
Yeah.
Oh, there's a lot of bad ideas shown in the chat.
We're not going to share them.
No, they're great, though.
Made me laugh.
All right.
Thank you, everyone.
See you all later.
Bye.